friends of b4, or: smart people to steal from
=============================================


I was talking to a guy named iheartjs on the #b4 channel a while back. He's working on (among other things) a sound system for the [toyCPU](http://pointersgonewild.wordpress.com/2012/07/25/short-update-on-toycpu/) project. 

ToyCPU is an educational virtual machine project lead by Maxime Chevalier. Turns out it's quite similar to ngaro, except that it uses a traditional register architecture rather than a pure stack one. If you follow that link, you'll see there's a pretty impressive web-based UI for it. Under the hood, toyCPU and ngaro both share the concept of virtual hardware components connected by ports, so I think it should be pretty easy to reuse this sound component.

Iheartjs said he might be able to adapt it when he's done, and I joked that we'd probably adapt it for him -- we're like the borg.

The more I think about it, though, the more I think the borg had a pretty decent strategy. If you're not familiar, the borg were a bunch of alien races from star trek - they go around assimilating entire civilizations into a collective hive mind to get at their technology. I can do without a hive mind, but I do like the idea of acquiring code from lots of different projects and sort of blending them into a coherent whole.

Here are some of the other projects that seem to fit with my goals:

 * [retro](http://rx-core.org/), obviously - that's where the ngaro vm came from.
 * [pl/0 language tools](http://www.oriontransfer.co.nz/learn/pl0-language-tools/index) by Samuel Williams contain an entire suite of tools for the language, PL/0. PL/0 is a simplified version of pascal, created by Dr. Nicklaus Wirth (who also created pascal, modula, and oberon). The linked project contains both an interpreter and compiler, consisting of a lexer, parser, code generator, and assembler, as well as a stack-based virtual machine for running the generated code. All of these are written in python.
 * [cvm](https://github.com/ITikhonov/cvm) by Ivan Tikhonov is another tiny virtual stack machine written in c and python by a fellow redditor.
 * [itsyforth](http://www.retroprogramming.com/2012/03/itsy-forth-1k-tiny-compiler.html) is a tiny forth system by John Metcalf, explained over a series of blog posts. I studied his code quite a bit before embarking on this project, and found it quite educational.
 * [jonesforth](http://rwmj.wordpress.com/2010/08/07/jonesforth-git-repository/) by Richard Jones is a small forth implementation for x86 linux, bootstrapped from assembly language. It is extensively documented, almost a literate program, and provides a nice path for bootstrapping a system from almost nothing.
 * [picolisp](http://picolisp.com/5000/!wiki?home) by Alexander Burger might be a bit surprising, because it's obviously not a forth (although it used to have a forth-like system attached). As Richard Jones has pointed out, forth and lisp are sort of complementary: forth is the ultimate low level programming system, and lisp is the ultimate high level programming system. Picolisp is a small, practical lisp interpreter that I find especially well-crafted. In particular, it rejects the notion of arrays, so all data in picolisp uses linked lists. This simplifies the memory model signficantly. Further, picolisp includes both an inference engine and a relational database, both of which are core features I'd like to see in b4.
 * [tinypy](http://tinypy.org/) by Phil Hassey is a minimal python implementation of python written in 64k of C code. I may have already mentioned that python itself uses a stack machine (though, in contrast to forth, it blends the data and return stacks). I have an interest in seeing a python like language running on b4's vm, and having it cooperate with the other languages. One particularily nice feature of tinypy is its unusual hand-coded Earley parser. And speaking of parsers,
 * [ometa](http://tinlizzie.org/ometa/) is a small programming language created by Alessandro Warth for building parsers with composition and inheritance (meaning you can build lots of different languages). It was originally implemented in smalltalk, but now has implementations in a variety of other languages.

I suppose this is a rather long list, and probably doesn't help to explain what b4 is all about. 

B4 is very much a forth with a database and a text-based user interface, but it will be surrounded by features that are already working quite well in the above systems, all of which are fairly small and easy to understand. 
 
Perhaps also, given our borg agenda, the word "friend" might not be as appropriate as the word "victim", but hopefully we'll be able to contribute something back to these projects along the way instead of just taking from them. :)
